Licence
=======

DIVINE is **free software**, distributed under a 3-clause **BSD
licence**. Detailed licence texts may be found in the COPYING file in the
distribution tarball. The tool is a product of the ParaDiSe Laboratory, Faculty
of Informatics of Masaryk University.

This distribution includes freely redistributable **third-party code**. Please
refer to AUTHORS and COPYING included in the distribution for copyright and
licensing details.

Download
========

The source code of the latest version of DIVINE is available for download.
Windows builds are currently not provided, please contact us if you need them.
Please also note that DiVinE Cluster, DiVinE Multi-Core and ProbDiVinE have
been discontinued.

> * Latest source code: **[divine-@version@.tar.gz](download/divine-@version@.tar.gz)**.
>
> Please consult [release notes] [1] for a summary of changes between
> releases. Binaries and source tarballs of development snapshots can be
> obtained from [hydra] [2]. Check the [installation instructions] [7] in the
> manual.

NB. When built on **windows**, DIVINE currently does not include support for
LLVM bitcode verification (this is work in progress) nor does it offer
distributed execution through MPI (currently not planned).

[1]: whatsnew.html
[2]: http://divine.fi.muni.cz/hydra/jobset/divine/mainline-debug

Alternatively, you can obtain the latest source code for DIVINE by fetching it
directly from our version control system, using [darcs] [6]:

    darcs get http://divine.fi.muni.cz/darcs/mainline divine

If you experience any problem downloading our source repository please try

    darcs get --no-http-pipelining http://divine.fi.muni.cz/darcs/mainline divine

or update to newest available version of darcs.

[6]: http://darcs.net
[7]: manual.html#installation

Old Releases
============

* [divine-2.5.2.tar.gz](download/divine-2.5.2.tar.gz)  
  [divine-2.5-win32.exe](download/divine-2.5-win32.exe)
* [divine-2.4.tar.gz](download/divine-2.4.tar.gz)  
  [divine-2.4-win32.exe](download/divine-2.4-win32.exe) (Windows installer)
* [divine-2.3.tar.gz](download/divine-2.3.tar.gz)
* [divine-2.2.tar.gz](download/divine-2.2.tar.gz)
* [divine-2.1.1.tar.gz](download/divine-2.1.1.tar.gz)  
  [divine-2.1.1.exe](download/divine-2.1.1.exe) (Windows CLI)  
  [divine-2.1.1-win32.exe](download/divine-2.1.1-win32.exe) (Windows installer)
* [divine-2.1.tar.gz](download/divine-2.1.tar.gz)
* [divine-2.0.tar.gz](download/divine-2.0.tar.gz)

DiVinE Multi-Core:

* [divine-mc-1.4.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.4.tar.gz)
* [divine-mc-1.3.1.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.3.1.tar.gz)
* [divine-mc-1.3.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.3.tar.gz)
* [divine-mc-1.2.1.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.2.1.tar.gz)
* [divine-mc-1.1.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.1.tar.gz)
* [divine-mc-1.0-beta1.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.0-beta1.tar.gz)

DiVinE Cluster:

* [divine-cluster-0.8.3.tar.gz](download/divine-cluster-0.8.3.tar.gz)
* [divine-cluster-0.8.2.tar.gz](download/divine-cluster-0.8.2.tar.gz)
* [divine-cluster-0.8.0.tar.gz](download/divine-cluster-0.8.0.tar.gz)
* [divine-0.7.2.tar.gz](download/divine-0.7.2.tar.gz)
* [divine-0.7.1.tar.gz](download/divine-0.7.1.tar.gz)
* [divine-0.7.0.tar.gz](download/divine-0.7.0.tar.gz)

