Licence
=======

DiVinE is free software, distributed under GNU GPL and BSD licences. Detailed
licence texts may be found in the COPYING file in the distribution tarball. The
tool is a product of the ParaDiSe Laboratory, Faculty of Informatics of Masaryk
University.

This distribution includes freely redistributable third-party code. Please
refer to AUTHORS and COPYING included in the distribution for copyright and
licensing details.

Download
========

The source code of the latest version of DiVinE is available for download.
Binaries are only available for 32-bit Windows.  Please note that DiVinE
Cluster and DiVinE Multi-Core have been discontinued and that ProbDiVinE is
distributed as a part of the main DiVinE package.

Download: **[divine-2.5.2.tar.gz] [1]**.  An installer for 32 bit windows:
**[divine-2.5-win32.exe] [3]**.

The current *development* version is **[divine-2.92.tar.gz] [4]** (3.0 alpha
2). Binaries of development snapshots can be [obtained from hydra] [5].

Please consult [release notes] [2] for a summary of changes between releases.

[1]: download/divine-2.5.2.tar.gz
[2]: whatsnew.html
[3]: download/divine-2.5-win32.exe
[4]: download/divine-2.92.tar.gz
[5]: http://divine.fi.muni.cz/hydra/jobset/divine/mainline-debug

Alternatively, you can obtain the latest source code for DiVinE 2.x by fetching
it directly from our version control system. If you have the [darcs] [1] system
installed then the latest source code tarball can be obtained as follows:

    darcs get http://divine.fi.muni.cz/darcs/mainline divine

Archive of old releases
-----------------------

* [divine-2.4.tar.gz](download/divine-2.4.tar.gz)  
  [divine-2.4-win32.exe](download/divine-2.4-win32.exe) (Windows installer)
* [divine-2.3.tar.gz](download/divine-2.3.tar.gz)
* [divine-2.2.tar.gz](download/divine-2.2.tar.gz)
* [divine-2.1.1.tar.gz](download/divine-2.1.1.tar.gz)  
  [divine-2.1.1.exe](download/divine-2.1.1.exe) (Windows CLI)  
  [divine-2.1.1-win32.exe](download/divine-2.1.1-win32.exe) (Windows installer)
* [divine-2.1.tar.gz](download/divine-2.1.tar.gz)
* [divine-2.0.tar.gz](download/divine-2.0.tar.gz)

DiVinE Multi-Core:

* [divine-mc-1.4.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.4.tar.gz)
* [divine-mc-1.3.1.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.3.1.tar.gz)
* [divine-mc-1.3.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.3.tar.gz)
* [divine-mc-1.2.1.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.2.1.tar.gz)
* [divine-mc-1.1.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.1.tar.gz)
* [divine-mc-1.0-beta1.tar.gz](download/divine-mc-1.0-beta1.tar.gz)

DiVinE Cluster:

* [divine-cluster-0.8.3.tar.gz](download/divine-cluster-0.8.3.tar.gz)
* [divine-cluster-0.8.2.tar.gz](download/divine-cluster-0.8.2.tar.gz)
* [divine-cluster-0.8.0.tar.gz](download/divine-cluster-0.8.0.tar.gz)
* [divine-0.7.2.tar.gz](download/divine-0.7.2.tar.gz)
* [divine-0.7.1.tar.gz](download/divine-0.7.1.tar.gz)
* [divine-0.7.0.tar.gz](download/divine-0.7.0.tar.gz)

Installation
============

If you are using the Windows installer, just execute the downloaded file and
follow the installation wizard. The rest of this section is only relevant for
installation from source.

Prerequisites
-------------

* A POSIX-compatible operating system (tested on Linux).
* Recent GNU C++ compiler with support of POSIX Threads.
* Cmake \[[www.cmake.org](http://www.cmake.org)\]  
  Note: If your computer is connected to the Internet during installation, the
  configure script is able to download and compile cmake package for you.
* One of the distribution tarballs as provided above.

Instructions
------------
                  
* Unzip the distribution tarball and enter the newly created directory

      tar xvzf divine-2.5.tar.gz
      cd divine-2.5
                     
* Now configure and compile the package:
                        
      ./configure
      make

* And test that the compilation succeeded.
                        
      cd _build/tools
      ./divine help
      ./divine verify ../../examples/shuffle.dve
      ./divine verify ../../examples/peterson-liveness.dve
      ./divine verify ../../examples/peterson-naive.dve
                     
* There is no need to install the binary, it is self-contained. However,
  if you like, you can install divine for more convenient access:
                        
       make install

